feat(AIP-4210): add code gen diagram + tweaks (#1148)
googleapis/aip: aip/client-libraries/4210.md

## Guidance

> The general flow of code generation for client libraries and supporting code is

Reviewer: maybe mention: "for most languages" (since e.g. in TypeScript / protobuf.js we only have GAPIC generator, but no stubs and no gRPC stubs)

Author: Good call, I called out node.js and python since they are different but both good examples of deviations

    fillcolor = lightgrey;
    node [ shape=oval ];

    protobuf [ label="protobuf\ngenerator" fillcolor=deepskyblue3 ];
    grpc [ label="gRPC\ngenerator" fillcolor=gold3 ];
    gapic [ label="GAPIC\ngenerator" fillcolor=darkseagreen ];

  }

  proto -> protobuf;
  proto -> grpc;
  proto -> gapic;

  subgraph cluster_generated_code {
    rank = same;
    style = filled;
    fillcolor = lightgrey;
    node [ shape=rectangle ];

    protobuf_output [ label="Message & Enum\nCode" fillcolor=deepskyblue3 ];
    grpc_output [ label="Server & Client\nStubs" fillcolor=gold3 ];
    gapic_output [ label="Google API\nClient" fillcolor=darkseagreen ];

  }
  
  protobuf -> protobuf_output;
  grpc -> grpc_output;
  gapic -> gapic_output;

  assembly [ label="Package\nassembly" shape=oval fillcolor=aliceblue ];
  
  protobuf_output -> assembly
  grpc_output -> assembly
  gapic_output -> assembly

  assembled_package [ label="Package of\ngenerated code" fillcolor=aliceblue ];

  assembly -> assembled_package
}
```

The following sections focus on the "GAPIC generator" in the above diagram.

### Protobuf plugins

The protobuf compiler, `protoc`, supports a [plugin system][0] for code

> generation. The [plugin system][0] allows plugins to be written _in_ and _for_

Reviewer: nit: the second `plugin system` does not need to be a link.

Author: done

any language.

Code generators **must** be implemented as a `protoc` plugin. The following
rules apply to the implementation of a client library generator as a `protoc`
plugin:

- The plugin  **should** be written in the language being targeted for
  generation.
- `protoc` expects plugins to be an executable in `$PATH`, and named
  `protoc-gen-{plugin_name}`, corresponding to the `--{plugin_name}_out` option
  sent to the `protoc` executable. As such:
  - the plugin executable **should** be named `protoc-gen-{lang}_gapic`
  - the plugin option  **should** follow the convention `--{lang}_gapic_out`
- The plugin **must** accept a serialized `CodeGeneratorRequest` object (defined
  in [`plugin.proto`][1]) on `stdin`; the bulk of this is a series of
  `FileDescriptorProto` messages (defined in [`descriptor.proto`][2]).

> - The plguin **must** emit a serialized `CodeGeneratorResponse` object (defined

Reviewer: nit: typo

Author: done

  in [`plugin.proto`][1]) on `stdout`.
- The plugin **must not** leverage `protoc` "insertion points". Despite the

>   `protoc` plugin documentation indicating the existance of insertion points,

Reviewer: typo: existence?

Author: yep! done.

## Guidance

The general flow of code generation for client libraries and supporting code in
most supported languages is outlined below.

**Note:** Exceptions to this pattern are typically due to use of a unique stack
e.g. Node.js use of `protobuf.js` and `grpc-node` which don't have code
generation, or Python using a protobuf wrapper in `proto-plus-python`, but the
general GAPIC flow remains the same.

```graphviz
digraph {
  node [ style="filled,solid" shape=box fontname="Roboto" ];
  splines=ortho;
  nodesep=0.3;
  center=true;

  proto [ label="API Protobuf\nDescriptors" shape=rectancle fillcolor=aliceblue ];

  subgraph cluster_code_generators {
    rank = same;
    style = filled;
    fillcolor = lightgrey;
    node [ shape=oval ];

    protobuf [ label="protobuf\ngenerator" fillcolor=deepskyblue3 ];
    grpc [ label="gRPC\ngenerator" fillcolor=gold3 ];
    gapic [ label="GAPIC\ngenerator" fillcolor=darkseagreen ];

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extraneous blank line?

Author: Done.

  }

  proto -> protobuf;
  proto -> grpc;
  proto -> gapic;

  subgraph cluster_generated_code {
    rank = same;
    style = filled;
    fillcolor = lightgrey;
    node [ shape=rectangle ];

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extraneous blank line?

Author: Done

    protobuf_output [ label="Message & Enum\nCode" fillcolor=deepskyblue3 ];
    grpc_output [ label="Server & Client\nStubs" fillcolor=gold3 ];
    gapic_output [ label="Google API\nClient" fillcolor=darkseagreen ];

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extraneous blank line?

Author: Done.

  }
  
  protobuf -> protobuf_output;
  grpc -> grpc_output;
  gapic -> gapic_output;

  assembly [ label="Package\nassembly" shape=oval fillcolor=aliceblue ];
  
  protobuf_output -> assembly
  grpc_output -> assembly
  gapic_output -> assembly

  assembled_package [ label="Package of\ngenerated code" fillcolor=aliceblue ];

  assembly -> assembled_package
}
```

The following sections focus on the "GAPIC generator" in the above diagram.

### Protobuf plugins

The protobuf compiler, `protoc`, supports a [plugin system][0] for code
generation. The plugin system allows plugins to be written _in_ and _for_ any
language.

> Code generators **must** be implemented as a `protoc` plugin. The following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Code generators **must** be implemented as `protoc` plugins. The following
```

(Or "Each code generator must be implemented as a protoc plugin. But the singular and plural should match...)

Author: Took your suggestion in my own commit. Done.

rules apply to the implementation of a client library generator as a `protoc`
plugin:

- The plugin  **should** be written in the language being targeted for
  generation.
- `protoc` expects plugins to be an executable in `$PATH`, and named
  `protoc-gen-{plugin_name}`, corresponding to the `--{plugin_name}_out` option
  sent to the `protoc` executable. As such:

>   - the plugin executable **should** be named `protoc-gen-{lang}_gapic`

Reviewer 2: We definitely violate this for C#... I'd argue that it's actually better practice to explicitly specify the executable file when running a generator, so you know you're running the executable you expect rather than "some random binary which happens to be on the path".

Author: Yeah, I think PHP also violates it...I'm not sure I want to change a recommendation here regarding use of `--plugin` because that would impact our Bazel rule implementations (which invoke the generator binary) and would impact the plugin option names (thus all of the docs we have).

I think the main reasoning was that so all of them could be run at with a single `protoc` invocation unambiguously, but we all know that's not how our pipeline works today.

Can we put a pin this one? WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Happy to punt on this for now, certainly.

  - the plugin option  **should** follow the convention `--{lang}_gapic_out`

> - The plugin **must** accept a serialized `CodeGeneratorRequest` object (defined

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure whether this bullet point is really worth including - we're really just saying "it must be a normal protoc plugin". I'd expect the rules in the AIP to be additional requirements. This bullet point and the next one could be in an explanatory section about what protoc does, but it feels a bit odd to have it here as rules... it's a bit like saying "For compiled languages, the generator must compile without errors."

Author: For sure, good point. I'll remove them.

  in [`plugin.proto`][1]) on `stdin`; the bulk of this is a series of
  `FileDescriptorProto` messages (defined in [`descriptor.proto`][2]).
- The plugin **must** emit a serialized `CodeGeneratorResponse` object (defined
  in [`plugin.proto`][1]) on `stdout`.
- The plugin **must not** leverage `protoc` "insertion points". Despite the
  `protoc` plugin documentation indicating the existence of insertion points,

>   its use is unsupported and discouraged by the Protobuf team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  their use is unsupported and discouraged by the Protobuf team.
```

Author: Took your suggestion in my own commit. Done.

write). Client libraries **must** implement these concepts in order to be
considered complete.

### Messages and Enums

> Client library generators **should not** generate code for `message` or `enum`

Reviewer 2: Or service stubs which are already generated by gRPC?

Author: Hm you mean a like a grpc client stub for a `service` that would then be used by a GAPIC? If so, then yeah, I agree and will add.

Just want to clarify because of course w should be generating client types for `service`s 🙃

Author: I added a bullet to the existing `Services and methods` section below this to that effect, lmk.

Reviewer 2: Looks good, thanks.
